---
layout: post
title: "Relaying"
date: 2013-09-08 15:27
comments: true
categories: [OPW, Twisted]
---
My latest Twisted adventure began with a comment I came across in `relay.py`:

```python
class RelayerMixin:

    # XXX - This is -totally- bogus
    # It opens about a -hundred- -billion- files
    # and -leaves- them open!
```

This seemed like a worthy problem to investigate so that, at the very least, I
could write a ticket to track the issue.

The first challenge was to set up a smart host configuration with Twisted.
A smart host is a mail server which accepts mail to any address and
then determines the mail exchange for the address and connects to it to relay
the mail.  Unlike an open relay, a smart host imposes restrictions on the
source of messages.  While some may accept mail only from authenticated
senders, Twisted's default is to relay any mail received over a Unix socket or
from localhost.

It was easy enough to run a smart host on my development machine.  I just had
to invoke `twistd mail` with the relay option and specify a directory to hold
messages to be relayed:

```
twistd -n mail --relay=/tmp/mail_queue
```

The smart host uses DNS to look up mail exchanges and
contacts them via SMTP on port 25.  Because my ISP does not allow outgoing
traffic on port 25 and because I did not want to relay test messages to
real mail servers, I needed to make some changes to the Twisted source so that
the email messages would be relayed to a Twisted mail server that I ran on a
second computer.  I modified `relaymanager.py` to relay to port 8025 and to
use a hosts file for DNS resolution.
``` python
class SmartHostSMTPRelayingManager:
    ...
    # PORT = 25
    PORT = 8025
    ...
    def _checkStateMX(self):
        ...
        if self.mxcalc is None:
            # self.mxcalc = MXCalculator()
            from twisted.names.client import createResolver
            resolver = createResolver(None, None, b"/tmp/hosts")
            self.mxcalc = MXCalculator(resolver)
```
The hosts file maps `example.com` and `example.net` to the IP address of the
computer running the target mail server.
```
10.224.77.149 example.com
10.224.77.149 example.net 
```
I configured that server to run on the default port, 8025,
and accept mail for a few users on the domains `example.com` and `example.net`:

```
twistd -n mail -d example.com=/tmp/example.com -u jim=pwd -u nat=pwd 
-d example.net=/tmp/example.net -u joe=pwd -u bob=pwd
```

When I used telnet on the development machine to send mail to the smart host
running on the same machine and addressed it to one of the configured users on
example.com or example.net, the smart host relayed it to the mail server on the
second machine.

Now that I had a usable configuration, I wanted to explore the implications of
the comment that `RelayerMixin` opened a large number of files and never closed
them.  `RelayerMixin` is used to introduce a set of functions for relaying mail
to another class, a relayer, through inheritance. On initialization, the
relayer calls one of the `RelayerMixin` functions, `loadMessages`, with a list
of the pathnames of messages which it is responsible for relaying.
`loadMessages`  opens each message file and stores the file object in a list.
I hypothesized that if I sent a lot of messages to the smart host at once, its
relayers would open files for all the messages and hit the operating system
limit for open files.

I wrote a short program to send the SMTP commands for a series of messages to
the smart host running on port 8025 of the same machine.  The messages are
randomly destined to one of two addresses on each of the two domains served by
the mail server on the other machine.

```python
from twisted.internet import protocol, reactor
from twisted.test.proto_helpers import LineSendingProtocol
from twisted.internet.defer import Deferred
from random import randint

NUM_MESSAGES = 250

addresses = ['joe@example.net', 'bob@example.net', 
             'jim@example.com', 'nat@example.com']
num_addrs = len(addresses) - 1

msgs = ['helo']

for i in range(0, NUM_MESSAGES):
    origin = 'foo@example.com'
    destination = addresses[randint(0, num_addrs)]
    msgs.append('mail from: <{}>'.format(origin))
    msgs.append('rcpt to: <{}>'.format(destination))
    msgs.append('data'),
    msgs.append('from {} to {}'.format(origin, destination)),
    msgs.append('hi {}'.format(destination)),
    msgs.append('.'),

msgs.append('quit')
client = LineSendingProtocol(msgs)

done = Deferred()
f = protocol.ClientFactory()
f.protocol = lambda: client
f.clientConnectionLost = lambda *args: done.callback(None)

def finished(reason):
    reactor.stop()

done.addCallback(finished)

reactor.connectTCP('127.0.0.1', 8025, f) 
reactor.run()
```

As I increased the number of messages sent, I expected to eventually see an
exception occur when too many files were opened but that did not occur no
matter how many messages were sent.  From the server log, I observed
that instead of opening one connection to the mail server for each domain and 
sending all the queued messages for that domain, the smart host was repeatedly
connecting to the mail server and sending no more than a few messages at a
time. That explained why the limit on open files was not being reached.  The
relayers were being handed only a few messages at a time so there was no
need to open a lot of files at once. 

This strategy for allocating work to relayers did not seem very efficient so I
started exploring further.  `SmartHostSMTPRelayingManager`, which implements
the smart host functionality, has a function, `checkState`, which is called
periodically to see if there are messages waiting to be relayed and if there is
capacity to create new relayers.  If so, it calls `_checkStateMX` to create
relayers and allocate messages to them.  It turns out that `_checkStateMX` 
contains a subtle bug which is the cause of the allocation behavior.

```python
    def _checkStateMX(self):
        nextMessages = self.queue.getWaiting()
        nextMessages.reverse()

        exchanges = {}
        for msg in nextMessages:
            from_, to = self.queue.getEnvelope(msg)
            name, addr = rfc822.parseaddr(to)
            parts = addr.split('@', 1)
            if len(parts) != 2:
                log.err("Illegal message destination: " + to)
                continue
            domain = parts[1]

            self.queue.setRelaying(msg)
            exchanges.setdefault(domain, []).append(self.queue.getPath(msg))
            if len(exchanges) >= (self.maxConnections - len(self.managed)):
                break

```
`_checkStateMX` asks the relay queue for a list of waiting messages.  Then it
loops through the messages, grouping them by target domain. Eventually, each
group will be handed off to a relayer. The problem is that `_checkStateMX`
breaks out of the loop as soon as it has at least one message for the maximum
number of domains it can concurrently contact.  That value, `maxConnections`,
is an optional parameter to `SmartHostSMTPRelayingManager.__init__`.  Its
default value is 2.

As `_checkStateMX` loops through the waiting messages, it creates a list of
messages for the first domain it sees and keeps adding messages for that domain
to the list.  When it sees a second domain, it creates another list for that
domain but since it has hit the limit on connections, it breaks out of the
loop.  So, any other messages in the queue for either domain must wait to be
sent even though they could be handled by the same relayers.  Instead of
breaking out of the loop when it reaches the connection limit, `_checkStateMX`
should continue to add messages to the lists for the domains it has already
seen and ignore messages for other domains.

With the understanding of how messages are allocated to relayers, I was now
easily able to trigger an exception for too many open files by sending a
large number of messages to one domain instead of splitting them between two.

As a result of this exploration, I filed and submitted fixes for two issue
tickets, a defect [ticket](https://tm.tl/#6719) for the handling of open files
by `RelayerMixin`, and an enhancement [ticket](https://tm.tl/#6717) to improve
how messages are allocated to relayers.  
